Add EIP: Flow Control Wallet Call Capability (#9259)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-draft_wallet-call-flow-control.md

---
eip: xxxx
title: Flow Control Wallet Call Capability
description: An EIP-5792 capability providing atomicity and flow control configuration.
author: Sam Wilson (@SamWilsn) <sam@binarycake.ca>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/wallet-sendcalls-capability-flow-control/22624
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Interface
created: 2025-01-17
requires: 5792
---

## Abstract

> This proposal extends [EIP-5792](./eip-5792.md) to allow dapps to downgrade their required atomicity guarantees and control the behaviour after a failed/reverted call. It introduces the batch-scope concept of `strict` vs. `loose` atomicity, where a `strict` batch remains atomic in the face of chain reorgs and a `loose` batch does not; and the per-call ability to continue after a failed/reverted call (`continue`) or stop processing (`halt`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal extends [EIP-5792](./eip-5792.md) to allow dapps to downgrade their required atomicity guarantees and control the behaviour after a failed/reverted call. It introduces the batch-scope concept of `strict` vs. `loose` atomicity, where a `strict` batch remains atomic in the face of chain reorgs and a `loose` batch does not; and the per-call ability to continue after a failed/reverted call (`continue`) or stop processing (`halt`).
```

        "capabilities": {
            "flow-control": {
                "on-failure": "continue"
            }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

#### `wallet_getCapabilities`

The following JSON Schema is inserted into the per-chain object returned from `wallet_getCapabilities` with a key of `flow-control`.

##### Schema

```json
{
    "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
    "type": "object",
    "additionalProperties": false,
    "minProperties": 1,
    "properties": {
        "none": { "$ref": "#/$defs/on-failure" },
        "loose": { "$ref": "#/$defs/on-failure" },
        "strict": { "$ref": "#/$defs/on-failure" }
    },
    "$defs": {
        "on-failure": {
            "type": "array",
            "uniqueItems": true,
            "minItems": 1,
            "items": {
                "enum": ["rollback", "halt", "continue"]
            }
        }
    }
}
```

##### Example Response

```js
{
    "0x1": {
        "flow-control": {
            "loose": ["halt", "continue"],
            "strict": ["continue"]
        }
    }
}
```

### Concepts

#### Call Failure

<!-- TODO: is a "call failure" the same as a "revert"? -->

#### Rollback

> A rollback is informally defined as "causing no meaningful changes on chain." A

Reviewer: Is there any reason to break up lines like this? A paragraph could be on one line and use line wrapping, not sure what the standard is here

Author: I like a narrow line width, but we accept both wrapped and unwrapped lines.

rolled back batch only makes gas accounting and bookkeeping (eg. nonce)
changes. In other words, a rollback is the default behaviour of EIP-5792 when
a call fails.

#### Critical Calls

> A critical call is a call the causes the entire batch to rollback on failure,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A critical call is a call that causes the entire batch to rollback on failure,
```

and correspondingly a non-critical call does not. Specifically, a critical call
has a call-scope `on-failure` of `rollback` (or no `on-failure` present),
while non-critical calls have either `halt` or `continue`.

#### Atomicity Levels

This proposal introduces three atomicity levels: strict, loose, and none; enabled
by setting batch-scope `atomicity` to `strict`, `loose`, or `none` respectively.
Strict may also be enabled by omitting `atomicity` entirely.

Strict atomicity is simply naming the default behaviour of EIP-5792: calls
within a single batch MUST be contiguous and applied atomically (or the batch
rolled back.)

Loose atomicity, on the other hand, is a weaker guarantee. In the event of a
block reorg, any number of calls from the batch MAY appear on chain (possibly

> interspersed with other transactions.) If there are no block reorgs, loose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interspersed with other transactions). If there are no block reorgs, loose
```

atomicity MUST provide the same guarantees as strict.

The none level of atomicity only provides the guarantee that the calls appear on
chain in the order they are in the batch. Any number of calls from the batch

> MAY appear on chain (possibly interspersed with other transactions.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MAY appear on chain (possibly interspersed with other transactions).
```

### Behaviour

#### `wallet_sendCalls`

The wallet MUST reject `wallet_sendCalls` requests with error code 0
<!-- TODO --> where both:

 - the batch-scope `flow-control` capability **is not** present; and
 - a call-scope `flow-control` capability **is** present.

Note that the above requirement still applies if the call-scope `flow-control`
capability is marked as optional.

When `flow-control` is present in the batch-scope `capabilities`, the following
changes override the behaviour specified in EIP-5792.

##### Removed Requirements

These requirements defined in EIP-5792 are removed:

> The wallet:
>
> * MUST NOT await for any calls to be finalized to complete the batch
> * MUST submit multiple calls as an atomic unit in a single transaction
> * MAY revert all calls if any call fails
> * MUST not execute any further calls after a failed call
> * MAY reject the request if one or more calls in the batch is expected to
>   fail, when simulated sequentially

##### Added Requirements

> The wallet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following requirements are imposed on wallets:
```

  * Wallets supporting `strict` but not `loose` SHOULD NOT reject `loose`
    batches and SHOULD instead upgrade the request to strict atomicity.
* MUST reject (with error code 0<!-- TODO -->) batches containing unsupported
  `on-failure` modes.
* MUST reject (with error code 0<!-- TODO -->) batches containing unsupported
  combinations/orderings of call-scope `on-failure` modes.
    * Wallets MUST reject `rollback` when used in a `none` batch, even if the
      batch is upgraded to `loose` or `strict` atomicity. This also applies to
      calls that do not specify an explicit `on-failure` mode.
* MAY reject (with error code 0<!-- TODO -->) the request if the batch is
  expected to be rolled back.
* SHOULD inform the user before executing any calls if any call in the batch is
  expected to fail.

#### `wallet_getCallsStatus`

When `wallet_getCallsStatus` is called with a batch identifier corresponding to
a batch submitted with the batch-scope `flow-control` capability enabled, the
following changes override the behaviour defined in EIP-5792. Note that:

* There are no changes when called with a batch without this capability enabled;

>   and

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

* Even if the behaviour of the batch is not changed from the default (eg.
  setting `atomicity` to `strict` and omitting the `flow-control` capability for
  all calls), the following changes still apply.

##### Removed Requirements

These requirements defined in EIP-5792 are removed:

> * If a wallet executes multiple calls **atomically** in a single transaction,
>   `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an object with a `receipts` field that
>   contains a single transaction receipt, corresponding to the transaction
>   in which the calls were included.
> * If a wallet executes multiple calls **non-atomically** through some
>   `capability` defined elsewhere, `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an
>   object with a `receipts` field that contains **an array of receipts** for
>   all transactions containing batch calls that were included onchain. This
>   includes the batch calls that were included on-chain but eventually
>   reverted.

##### Added Requirements

###### Capabilities

The returned capabilities object:

* MUST contain a `flow-control` key set to exactly the boolean `true`.
    * It may be tempting to include additional detail about the status of

>       individual calls here, but don't. Instead use a multi-status capability

Reviewer: Wording isn't very formal, maybe something like 'additional details on the status of individual calls SHOULD NOT be included'

            * `[(unsuccessful A), (successful A), (successful B)]`
        * Invalid Examples:
            * `[(successful A, unsuccessful B), (successful A, successful B)]`
            * `[(successful A, successful A), (successful B)]`
* MAY contain one or more receipts capturing each failed call.
    * For example, the wallet may retry a transaction with a higher gas limit.
      Both the failed and successful transaction receipts can be included,
      though only the successful receipt must be.
* SHOULD be stable over multiple `wallet_getCallsStatus` requests, with only new
  receipts being appended.
    * For example:
        * `[(unsuccessful A)]` followed by `[(unsuccessful A), (successful A)]`
        is valid; but
        * `[(unsuccessful A)]` followed by `[(successful A)]` should be avoided.

##### Status Codes

This proposal modifies some of the status codes for use with EIP-5792's
`GetCallsResult.status` field, and introduces the following new codes:

| Code   | Description           |
|--------|-----------------------|
| `102`  | Partially Executed    |
| `207`  | Partial Success       |

An "included" call, in this section, is defined as having either been

> successfully or unsuccessfully executed. A call that has been recorded on chain,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
executed, even if execution was unsuccessful. A call that has been recorded on chain,
```

but has not yet been executed, does not qualify as included. Executed calls
contained in batches that may still be rolled back also do not qualify as
included.

A batch is "complete" when all of the calls in the batch (up to and including a
failed call with an `on-failure` mode of `halt` should one be present) have been
included and the wallet will not resubmit failed calls.

###### `100` Pending

Status `100` MUST NOT be returned if any calls in the batch have been included
on chain.

###### `102` Partially Executed

Status `102` SHALL be returned only when all of the following are true:

>  * At least one call in the batch has been included on chain; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * At least one call in the batch has been included on chain.
```

 * The batch is not complete.

Responses with status `102` MUST contain at least one receipt, and SHOULD
contain receipts for all transactions with calls that have been included.

Note that a receipt capturing a failed call does not mean the call will
ultimately fail. Wallets can resubmit calls (eg. with a higher gas limit), and
the call may be executed successfully eventually.

###### `200` Confirmed

Status `200` MUST NOT be returned if any calls in the batch failed (including

> batch rollback, and the `on-failure` modes `halt`/`continue`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
batch rollback, and the `on-failure` modes `halt`/`continue`).
```

###### `207` Partial Success

Status `207` SHALL be returned only when all of the following are true:

> * At least one call in the batch has been included and succeeded;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* At least one call in the batch has been included and succeeded.
```
Same for rest of list, for consistency with other lists

Unlike a plain EOA, a shielded mempool can provide additional guarantees about
transaction atomicity. In this example, the wallet does not offer the
`on-failure` mode of `halt` when using `none` atomicity, but does when using
`loose`.

```js
{
    "0x1": {
        "flow-control": {
            "none": [ "rollback", "continue" ]
            "loose": [ "rollback", "halt", "continue" ]
        }
    }
}
```

###### Smart Contract Wallet

In this example, the wallet will service batches specifying `none` and `loose`
as if they requested `strict`. Even though the batches will work, the
`wallet_getCapabilities` response does not list `none` or `loose`.

```js
{
    "0x1": {
        "flow-control": {
            "strict": [ "rollback" ]
        }
    }
}
```

## Rationale

<!--
  The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

  The current placeholder is acceptable for a draft.

  TODO: Remove this comment before submitting
-->

TBD

## Backwards Compatibility

> <!--

Reviewer: can be removed
